W-14604001 java17 landing page vh (#201)
mulesoft/docs-general: modules/ROOT/pages/java-support.adoc

= Java Support

MuleSoft is adopting Java’s long-term-support (LTS) release cadence, beginning with Mule Runtime 4.6, which adds support for Java 17 LTS. 

Many third-party vendors are discontinuing support for Java 8, which impacts the MuleSoft product stack. Adopting this new release cadence provides greater security, compliance, and performance.

This change has no immediate impact to Mule applications and Mule Gateway policies and proxies that are running on currently supported Mule versions, or on applications that are upgraded to Mule Runtime 4.6, as existing Java 8 apps will continue to run on Java 8 until February 2026, giving you time to plan for your upgrade to Java 17.

Java 17 upgrade planning includes evaluating connectors, integration apps, Mule Gateway policies, and proxies, as all of these components rely on Java. 

== Mule Runtime Java Support

> The following table shows the timeline for Java 8 and Java 17 support:

Reviewer: i know it is in the note, but should we call out Java 11 support in the table too?

Author: I don't know yet. I brought this up before and everyone was resistant.

Reviewer 2: Mule runtime does [support Java 11](https://docs.mulesoft.com/mule-runtime/latest/hardware-and-software-requirements#required-software). So in this table, whenever JDK 8 appears, we might want to also add JDK 11 as they have the same support period.

[%header%autowidth.spread]
|===
|Mule Version| Release Date |Java Version | End of Standard Support | End of Extended Support
|4.5 Edge | October 2023 |8 | February 2024 | June 2024
|4.6 LTS | February 2024 | 8 and 17 | February 2025 | February 2026
|4.6 Edge | February 2024 |8 and 17| June 2024 | October 2024
|4.7 Edge | June 2024 | 8 and 17 | October 2024 | February 2026 ?
| 4.8 Edge | October 2024 | 8 and 17 | February 2025 | June 2025
| 4.9 LTS | February 2025 | 17 | February 2026 | February 2027
| 4.9 Edge | February 2025 | 17 | June 2025 | October 2025
|===

[NOTE]
Along with the end of support for Java 8 with the Mule Runtime 4.9 release in February 2025, Java 11 will also no longer be available. Plan your upgrade path for apps that are running on both Java 8 and Java 11.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe include a section here and link over to the Mule Runtime docs that describe the J17 changes

== Upgrading Mule Runtime

> == Upgrading Mule Apps

Reviewer: I wonder if we need to have at least a small callout for RTM, CloudHub, CloudHub 2.0, RTF. Like even just linking to the RNs because these products have some J17 changes right?

== Upgrading Anypoint Connectors and Modules

Anypoint Connectors and modules are certified by MuleSoft to run on Java 17. For information about Java 17 support for each connector and module, see the xref:release-notes::connector/anypoint-connector-release-notes.adoc[Release Notes] for that connector or module. Java compatibility information is also provided on the Exchange tiles for connectors and modules. 

The most commonly used Anypoint Connectors and modules are Java 17-compatible now, and others are being released regularly.

To upgrade Anypoint Connectors:

. Update your Mule app to run on Mule Runtime 4.6 or later. 
. In Anypoint Studio, update the connectors in your app to the latest version. 
. Deploy your Mule application:
  * xref:runtime-fabric::/deploy-to-runtime-fabric.adoc[Deploying Apps to Runtime Fabric]
  * xref:runtime-manager::cloudhub/deploy-mule-application-task.adoc[Deploying Apps to CloudHub]
  * xref:hosting::/ch2-deploy.adoc[Deploying Apps to CloudHub 2.0]

== Upgrading Custom Connectors

> Custom connectors are any connectors that are not developed and maintained by MuleSoft, including connectors that are built by MuleSoft partners using REST Connect, Mule SDK, or XML SDK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Custom connectors are any connectors that are not developed and maintained by MuleSoft, including connectors that are built by MuleSoft partners or customers using REST Connect, Java SDK, or XML SDK.
```

If you are using a custom connector in your app, you must update your connector to run on Java 17 and MuleSoft Runtime 4.6 and later. After you update your connector using Mule SDK, XML SDK, or REST Connect, you must test your app and deploy it. 

image:java-upgrade-connectors.png[Java upgrade steps for connectors]

[calloutlist]
. Update your connector using:
  * xref:mule-sdk/getting-started.adoc[Mule Java SDK]
  * xref:mule-sdk/xml-sdk.adoc[Mule XML SDK]
  * xref:exchange/to-deploy-using-rest-connect.adoc[REST Connect]
. Test your connector using xref:munit/index.adoc[MUnit].
. Deploy your Mule application:
  * xref:runtime-fabric::/deploy-to-runtime-fabric.adoc[Deploying Apps to Runtime Fabric]
  * xref:runtime-manager::cloudhub/deploy-mule-application-task.adoc[Deploying Apps to CloudHub]
  * xref:hosting::/ch2-deploy.adoc[Deploying Apps to CloudHub 2.0]

== Upgrading REST Connect Generated Connectors

> For connectors that are generated from an API specification, all you have to do to make the connector Java 17-compatible is republish the API specification to Exchange. 

Reviewer: Maybe move this to the above section since it was already mentioned there. We may not need a section solely for REST Connect connectors

Author: This is different from REST SDK. Which just made me realize, we shouldn't be mentioning REST SDK in this doc yet.

Reviewer: Yeah, I'm not saying we should mention REST SDK. I meant include this section about the REST Connect connectors in the Upgrading Custom Connectors section

> 

Reviewer: If there are Studio docs that mention the J17 changes (like UI or whatever), we may want to link to those docs in a relevant section here

Reviewer: Oh but that will be in March

Author: Yep. We will update this in March. :-)

See xref:exhange/to-deploy-using-rest-connect.adoc[REST Connect Connector Generator].

> 

Reviewer: We may also need sections/to explictly call out that Java SDK, XML SDK, and REST Connect as tooling have been upgraded to j17. We need to say which versions/link to those RNs at least. This is different than saying connectors generated with Java SDK, XML SDK, or REST Connect can be compatible with J17

[calloutlist]
. Update your connector using:
  * xref:mule-sdk/getting-started.adoc[Mule Java SDK]
  * xref:mule-sdk/xml-sdk.adoc[Mule XML SDK]
. Test your connector using xref:munit/index.adoc[MUnit].
. Deploy your Mule application:
  * xref:runtime-fabric::/deploy-to-runtime-fabric.adoc[Deploying Apps to Runtime Fabric]
  * xref:runtime-manager::cloudhub/deploy-mule-application-task.adoc[Deploying Apps to CloudHub]
  * xref:hosting::/ch2-deploy.adoc[Deploying Apps to CloudHub 2.0]

[[rest-connect-generated-connectors]]
== REST Connect Generated Connectors

REST Connect Connector Generator <version> is compatible with Java 17 and also adds support for TLS. To save time, enable TLS at the same time you update your generated connector for Java 17 so that you need to generate the connector and test your apps only once.

For connectors that are generated from an API specification using the REST Connect connector generator tool, all you have to do to make the connector Java 17-compatible is republish the API specification to Exchange. 

See xref:exhange/to-deploy-using-rest-connect.adoc#upgrade-rest-connector[REST Connect Connector Generator].

[[policies]]
== Policies

> The MuleSoft-included Mule Gateway and Flex Gateway policies are compatible with Java 17 beginning with the Mule runtime 4.6 release. These policies continue to be compatible with Java 8 until February 2025, so it's best to start updating your policies as soon as possible. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The MuleSoft-included Mule Gateway policies are compatible with Java 17 beginning with the Mule runtime 4.6 release. These policies continue to be compatible with Java 8 until February 2025, so it's best to start updating your policies as soon as possible. 
```

J17 is note relevant for Flex.

= Java Support

MuleSoft is adopting Java's long-term-support (LTS) release cadence, beginning with Mule runtime 4.6, which adds support for Java 17 LTS. 

Many third-party vendors are discontinuing support for Java 8, which impacts the MuleSoft product stack. Adopting this new release cadence provides greater security, compliance, and performance.

> This change has no immediate impact to Mule applications that are running on currently supported Mule versions, or on applications that are upgraded to Mule runtime 4.6, as existing Java 8 apps will continue to run on Java 8 until February 2026, giving you time to plan for your upgrade to Java 17.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This change has no immediate impact to Mule applications that are running on currently supported Mule versions, or on applications that are upgraded to Mule runtime 4.6, as existing Java 8 apps will continue to run on Java 8 until February 2025, giving you time to plan for your upgrade to Java 17.
```

Reviewer 2: As fas as I understand, Java 8 continue to be supported until February 2026.

> This change has no immediate impact to Mule applications that are running on currently supported Mule versions, or on applications that are upgraded to Mule runtime 4.6, as existing Java 8 apps will continue to run on Java 8 until February 2025, giving you time to plan for your upgrade to Java 17.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This change has no immediate impact to Mule applications that are running on currently supported Mule versions, or on applications that are upgraded to Mule runtime 4.6. Existing Java 8 apps continue to run on Java 8 until February 2025, giving you time to plan for your upgrade to Java 17.
```

Java 17 upgrade planning includes evaluating integration apps, connectors (Anypoint connectors and custom connectors), Mule Gateway policies, and API proxies, as all of these components rely on Java. 

[[mule-runtime-java-support]]
== Mule Runtime Java Support

The following table shows the timeline for Java 8, Java 11, and Java 17 support:

[%header%autowidth.spread]
|===
|Mule Version| Release Date |Java Version | End of Standard Support | End of Extended Support
|4.5 Edge | October 2023 |8 and 11 | February 2024 | June 2024
|4.6 LTS | February 2024 | 8, 11, and 17 | February 2025 | February 2026
|4.6 Edge | February 2024 |8, 11, and 17 | June 2024 | October 2024
|4.7 Edge | June 2024 | 8, 11, and 17 | October 2024 | February 2025
|4.8 Edge | October 2024 | 8, 11, and 17 | February 2025 | June 2025
|4.9 LTS | February 2025 | 17 | February 2026 | February 2027
|4.9 Edge | February 2025 | 17 | June 2025 | October 2025
|===

[NOTE]
Standard support for Java 8 and 11 ends with the Mule runtime 4.9 release in February 2025, so plan your upgrade path for apps that are running on either Java 8 or Java 11 accordingly.

> See xref:release-notes::mule-runtime/lts-edge-release-cadence.adoc[] for more information about Mule release cadences.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about Mule release cadences, see xref:release-notes::mule-runtime/lts-edge-release-cadence.adoc[].
```

[[mule-runtime]]
== Mule Runtime

To take advantage of the improved performance and security of Java 17, xref:release-notes::mule-runtime/updating-mule-4-versions.adoc[upgrade to Mule runtime 4.6 or later].

> Follow these best practices:

Reviewer 4: Nice succinct list.

> * Upgrade your standalone Mule instances.

Reviewer 4: Not sequential, right?

* Upgrade on-premises Mule instances that are managed through Runtime Manager.
* Update the Mule version used to build your Mule applications.
* xref:mule-runtime::deploying.adoc[Deploy your applications] to a target running on Mule 4.6 or later.

[[mule-apps]]
== Mule Apps

> The majority of Mule applications currently in use can be updated, tested, and redeployed. However, any apps and connectors that are running custom Java code require additional work to certify those components. Before you upgrade your integration apps or Mule Gateway policies and proxies to Java 17, all extensions, modules, and connectors used within those apps and policies must first be updated to be Java 17-compatible. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The majority of Mule applications can be updated, tested, and redeployed. However, any apps and connectors that are running custom Java code require additional work to certify those components. Before you upgrade your integration apps or Mule Gateway policies and proxies to Java 17, all extensions, modules, and connectors used within those apps and policies must first be updated to be Java 17-compatible. 
```

[IMPORTANT]

> To ensure your API proxies or Mule apps are protected when upgrading, upgrade your API policies *before* upgrading your API proxies or Mule apps.

Reviewer 4: Any way to capture this in the best practices list?

> To ensure your API proxies or Mule apps are protected when upgrading, upgrade your API policies *before* upgrading your API proxies or Mule apps.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To ensure your API proxies or Mule apps are protected when upgrading, upgrade your API policies _before_ upgrading your API proxies or Mule apps.
```

Reviewer 4: (bold items aren't translated.)

[[application-performance]]
=== Application Performance

Java 17 manages memory differently than it did in earlier versions like Java 8. In some cases, Java 17 preferentially commits to heap memory or uses heap memory for structures in some apps, which earlier Java versions allocated to native memory.

> Because of this change in Java 17 memory management, it is important for you to conduct xref:mule-runtime::tuning-test-validations.adoc[performance testing] and xref:mule-runtime::tuning-monitoring.adoc[monitoring] for your most common workloads.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Because of this change in Java 17 memory management, you must conduct xref:mule-runtime::tuning-test-validations.adoc[performance testing] and xref:mule-runtime::tuning-monitoring.adoc[monitoring] for your most common workloads.
```

If your apps are deployed on-premises: 

> * If your workloads are running on Runtime Fabric, you must have 1400 MB of memory allocation for 0.50 vCPU replica sizes. Memory requirements vary for individual apps. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* If your workloads are running on Runtime Fabric, you must allocate 1400 MB of memory for 0.50 vCPU replica sizes. Memory requirements vary for individual apps. 
```

Reviewer 4: or "you must configure 1400 MB of memory allocation"?

* If your workloads are running on-premises in a hybrid or standalone environment, you must tune your operating system's garbage collection algorithm. 

[[anypoint-connectors-and-modules]]
== Anypoint Connectors and Modules

> Anypoint Connectors and modules are certified by MuleSoft to run on Java 17. For information about Java 17 support for each connector and module, see the xref:release-notes::connector/anypoint-connector-release-notes.adoc[Release Notes] for that Mule 4 connector or module. Java compatibility information is also provided on the Exchange tiles for connectors and modules. 

Reviewer 4: Should Connectors be lc here?

> The most commonly used Anypoint Connectors and modules are Java 17-compatible now, and others are being released regularly. See https://help.salesforce.com/s/articleView?id=000782248&type=1[Java 17 Compatible Anypoint Connectors^] for a list of Java 17-compatible connectors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most commonly used Anypoint Connectors and modules are Java 17-compatible now, and others are being released regularly. For a list of Java 17-compatible connectors, see https://help.salesforce.com/s/articleView?id=000782248&type=1[Java 17 Compatible Anypoint Connectors^].
```

> The most commonly used Anypoint Connectors and modules are Java 17-compatible now, and others are being released regularly. For a list of Java 17-compatible connectors, see https://help.salesforce.com/s/articleView?id=000782248&type=1[Java 17 Compatible Anypoint Connectors^].

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The most commonly used Anypoint Connectors and modules are Java 17-compatible now, and others are being released regularly. For a list of Java 17-compatible connectors, see https://help.salesforce.com/s/articleView?id=000782248&type=1[Java 17-Compatible Anypoint Connectors^].
```

Reviewer 4: No need to add the ^ anymore!

To upgrade Anypoint Connectors:

. Update your Mule app to run on Mule runtime 4.6 or later. 

> . Change the target JVM at the project property level. This includes both upgrades and downgrades of the JVM version.

Reviewer 4: "This" needs a noun.
https://confluence.internal.salesforce.com/display/MTDT/MuleSoft+CX+Writing+Style+Reference#MuleSoftCXWritingStyleReference-%22it,%22%22this,%22%22these%22

. In Anypoint Studio, update the connectors in your app to the latest Java 17-compatible version. 
. xref:mule-runtime::deploying.adoc[Deploy your applications] to a target running on Mule 4.6 or later.

[[custom-connectors]]
== Custom Connectors

Custom connectors are any connectors that are not developed and maintained by MuleSoft, including connectors that are built by MuleSoft partners or customers. If you are using a custom connector in your app, you must update your connector to run on Java 17 and Mule runtime 4.6 and later. 

> If you are a MuleSoft partner:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If you are a MuleSoft partner:
```

+

> . Update your connector that is generated from:

Reviewer 4: This is within the Mule app? Or is there another step where they update that?

  ** xref:partner-connector-upgrade.adoc#upgrade-your-mule-sdk-connectors[Mule SDK]
  ** xref:partner-connector-upgrade.adoc#upgrade-your-rest-sdk-connectors[REST SDK]
  ** xref:partner-connector-upgrade.adoc#upgrade-your-rest-connect-connectors[REST Connect]

> . Test your connector using xref:partner-connector-upgrade.adoc#test-your-custom-connector-with-mtf[MTF].

Reviewer 4: Expand MTF?

. xref:mule-runtime::deploying.adoc[Deploy your applications] to a target running on Mule 4.6 or later.

> If you are a MuleSoft customer:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If you are a MuleSoft customer:
```

> . xref:mule-runtime::deploying.adoc[Deploy your applications] to a target running on Mule 4.6 or later.

Reviewer 4: future: make this - and some of the other steps - a partial

+
. Update your connector that is generated from:
  ** xref:customer-connector-upgrade.adoc#upgrade-your-mule-sdk-connectors[Mule SDK]
  ** xref:customer-connector-upgrade.adoc#upgrade-your-rest-connect-connectors[REST Connect]
. Test your connector using xref:customer-connector-upgrade.adoc#test-your-custom-connector-with-munit[MUnit].
. xref:mule-runtime::deploying.adoc[Deploy your applications] to a target running on Mule 4.6 or later.

[[policies]]
== Policies

> The MuleSoft-included Mule Gateway policies are compatible with Java 17 beginning with the Mule runtime 4.6 release. These policies continue to have standard support for Java 8 until February 2025, so it's best to start updating your policies as soon as possible. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Beginning with Mule 4.6, the MuleSoft-included Mule Gateway policies are compatible with Java 17. These policies support Java 8 until February 2025, so it's best to start updating your policies as soon as possible. 
```

Reviewer 4: Line 7 says you have plenty of time, but 105 makes it feel more urgent.

[IMPORTANT]

> To ensure your API proxies or Mule apps are protected when upgrading, upgrade your policies *before* upgrading your API proxies or Mule apps.

Reviewer 4: don't use bold for emphasis - items in bold aren't translated...

Reviewer 4: Dup with line 59... partial?

Also, maybe add to process steps?

> To ensure your API proxies or Mule apps are protected when upgrading, upgrade your policies *before* upgrading your API proxies or Mule apps.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To ensure your API proxies or Mule apps are protected when upgrading, upgrade your policies _before_ upgrading your API proxies or Mule apps.
```

For details about how to upgrade your policies, see xref:upgrade-policies-proxies.adoc#upgrading-automated-policies[Upgrading Automated Policies] and xref:upgrade-policies-proxies.adoc#upgrading-api-level-policies[Upgrading API-Level Policies].

[[api-proxies]]
== API Proxies

> The MuleSoft-included API proxies are compatible with Java 17 beginning with the Mule runtime 4.6 release. These API proxies continue to have standard support for Java 8 until February 2025, so it’s best to start updating your API proxies as soon as possible. 

Reviewer 4: See comments on line 105.

> The steps to upgrade are a little different, depending on which deployment model you use. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The steps to upgrade depend on which deployment model you use:
```

> * If you use Basic endpoint, deploy the adapted application to the server from Mule runtime and connect it to API Manager using autodiscovery. For more information, see xref:mule-gateway::mule-gateway-config-autodiscovery-mule4.adoc[Configuring Mule Gateway API Autodiscovery in a Mule 4 Application].

Reviewer 4: First sentence is a little hard to parse. Deploy from Mule to the server?

Do you need the hard-coded link text?

* If you use a Basic endpoint API instance to update your instance, update the Mule application connecting to your API instance.

[IMPORTANT]

> To ensure your API proxies or Mule apps are protected when upgrading, upgrade your API policies *before* upgrading your API proxies or Mule apps.

Reviewer 4: Partial!

> To ensure your API proxies or Mule apps are protected when upgrading, upgrade your API policies *before* upgrading your API proxies or Mule apps.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To ensure your API proxies or Mule apps are protected when upgrading, upgrade your API policies _before_ upgrading your API proxies or Mule apps.
```

For details about how to upgrade your API proxies, see xref:upgrade-policies-proxies.adoc#upgrading-api-proxies[Upgrading API Proxies].

[[mule-maven-plugin]]
== Mule Maven Plugin 

If you are using Mule Maven Plugin (MMP) to deploy your apps, configure the deployment to use Java 17.  

> When deploying to CloudHub, MMP deploys the latest build version of a release train when it's given a major and minor version. MMP has a new Java version property to explicitly deploy to a specified Java version.

Reviewer 4: Not super clear: "when it's given"

When deploying to Runtime Fabric (RTF) and CloudHub 2.0, MMP accepts the entire tag of the build so you can use the correct semantic version (SemVer) in your deployment. 

> See the following documentation for more information:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information, see the following documentation:
```

> * xref:cloudhub-2/ch2-deploy-maven.adoc[Deploying Apps to CloudHub 2.0 Using the Maven Plugin]

Reviewer: are you linking to this? https://docs.mulesoft.com/mule-runtime/latest/deploy-to-cloudhub-2 

if so:

xref:mule-runtime::deploy-to-cloudhub-2.adoc[Deploying Applications to CloudHub 2.0 Using the Mule Maven Plugin]

> When deploying to Runtime Fabric (RTF) and CloudHub 2.0, MMP accepts the entire tag of the build so you can use the correct semantic version (SemVer) in your deployment. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When deploying to Runtime Fabric and CloudHub 2.0, MMP accepts the entire tag of the build so you can use the correct semantic version (SemVer) in your deployment. 
```

Reviewer 4: RTF is not an allowed initialism.

> * xref:runtime-fabric/deploy-maven-4.x.adoc[Deploying Apps to Runtime Fabric Using the Maven Plugin]

Reviewer: are you linking to this? https://docs.mulesoft.com/mule-runtime/latest/deploy-to-rtf

if so:

xref:mule-runtime::deploy-to-rtf.adoc[Deploying Applications to Runtime Fabric Using the Mule Maven Plugin]

> * xref:mule-runtime::deploy-to-cloudhub-2.adoc[Deploying Applications to CloudHub 2.0 Using the Mule Maven Plugin]

Reviewer 4: Do you need the hard-coded link text?

[[dataweave]]
== DataWeave

> DataWeave uses Java’s reflection API to read and write Java objects and Java 17 adds some restrictions in encapsulation and reflective access that affect the Java Data Format.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
DataWeave uses Java’s reflection API to read and write Java objects. Java 17 adds some restrictions in encapsulation and reflective access that affect the Java Data Format.
```

To ensure that your applications continue to work as expected, follow these guidelines:

* Verify that the objects used by your application are Plain Old Java Objects (POJOs). 
+
POJOs are required from now on and you must also ensure that POJOs have:

* Default constructor
* Getters for all properties
* Setters for all properties

> See xref:dataweave::dataweave-formats-java.adoc#java-support[Java Support] for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information, see xref:dataweave::dataweave-formats-java.adoc#java-support[Java Support].
```

> * Default constructor

Reviewer 4: Does this list render properly as a sublist? It doesn't in preview.

To upgrade Anypoint Connectors:

. Update your Mule app to run on Mule runtime 4.6 or later. 
. Change the target JVM at the project property level. This includes both upgrades and downgrades of the JVM version.
. In Anypoint Studio, update the connectors in your app to the latest Java 17-compatible version. 
. xref:mule-runtime::deploying.adoc[Deploy your applications] to a target running on Mule 4.6 or later.

[[custom-connectors]]
== Custom Connectors

Custom connectors are any connectors that are not developed and maintained by MuleSoft, including connectors that are built by MuleSoft partners or customers. If you are using a custom connector in your app, you must update your connector to run on Java 17 and Mule runtime 4.6 and later. 

If you are a MuleSoft partner:

. In your Mule app, update your connector that is generated from:
  * xref:partner-connector-upgrade.adoc#upgrade-your-mule-sdk-connectors[Mule SDK]

>   * xref:partner-connector-upgrade.adoc#upgrade-your-rest-sdk-connectors[REST SDK]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * xref:partner-connector-upgrade.adoc#upgrade-your-rest-sdk-connectors[REST SDK (beta)]
```

  * xref:partner-connector-upgrade.adoc#upgrade-your-rest-connect-connectors[REST Connect]
. Test your connector using xref:partner-connector-upgrade.adoc#test-your-custom-connector-with-mtf[Module Testing Framework (beta)].
. xref:mule-runtime::deploying.adoc[Deploy your applications] to a target running on Mule 4.6 or later.

If you are a MuleSoft customer:

. In your Mule app, update your connector that is generated from:
  * xref:customer-connector-upgrade.adoc#upgrade-your-mule-sdk-connectors[Mule SDK]

>   * xref:customer-connector-upgrade.adoc#upgrade-your-rest-connect-connectors[REST Connect (beta)]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * xref:customer-connector-upgrade.adoc#upgrade-your-rest-connect-connectors[REST Connect]
```

[[mule-runtime-java-support]]
== Mule Runtime Java Support

The following table shows the timeline for Java 8, Java 11, and Java 17 support:

[%header%autowidth.spread]
|===
|Mule Version| Release Date |Java Version | End of Standard Support | End of Extended Support
|4.5 Edge | October 2023 |8 and 11 | February 2024 | June 2024
|4.6 LTS | February 2024 | 8, 11, and 17 | February 2025 | February 2026
|4.6 Edge | February 2024 |8, 11, and 17 | June 2024 | October 2024
|4.7 Edge | June 2024 | 8, 11, and 17 | October 2024 | February 2025
|4.8 Edge | October 2024 | 8, 11, and 17 | February 2025 | June 2025
|4.9 LTS | February 2025 | 17 | February 2026 | February 2027
|4.9 Edge | February 2025 | 17 | June 2025 | October 2025
|===

[NOTE]
Along with the end of support for Java 8 with the Mule runtime 4.9 release in February 2025, Java 11 will also no longer be available. Plan your upgrade path for apps that are running on either Java 8 or Java 11.

See xref:release-notes::mule-runtime/lts-edge-release-cadence.adoc[] for more information about Mule release cadences.

[[mule-runtime]]
== Mule Runtime

> To take advantage of the improved performance and security of Java 17 xref:mule-runtime::updating-mule-4-versions.adoc[Upgrade to Mule runtime 4.6 or later].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To take advantage of the improved performance and security of Java 17, xref:mule-runtime::updating-mule-4-versions.adoc[upgrade to Mule runtime 4.6 or later].
```

Reviewer: this link isnt working

Follow these best practices:

* Upgrade your standalone Mule instances.
* Upgrade on-premises Mule instances that are managed through Runtime Manager.
* Update the Mule version used to build your Mule applications.
* xref:mule-runtime::deploying.adoc[Deploy your applications] to a target running on Mule 4.6 or later.

[[mule-apps]]
== Mule Apps

The majority of Mule applications currently in use can be updated, tested, and redeployed. However, any apps and connectors that are running custom Java code require additional work to certify those components. Before you upgrade your integration apps or Mule Gateway policies and proxies to Java 17, all extensions, modules, and connectors used within those apps and policies must first be updated to be Java 17-compatible. 

[IMPORTANT]
To ensure your API proxies or Mule apps are protected when upgrading, upgrade your API policies *before* upgrading your API proxies or Mule apps.

> === Application Performance

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[[application-performance]]
=== Application Performance
```

To upgrade Anypoint Connectors:

. Update your Mule app to run on Mule runtime 4.6 or later. 
. Change the target JVM at the project property level. This includes both upgrades and downgrades of the JVM version.
. In Anypoint Studio, update the connectors in your app to the latest Java 17-compatible version. 
. Deploy your Mule application:
  * xref:runtime-fabric::/deploy-to-runtime-fabric.adoc[Deploying Apps to Runtime Fabric]
  * xref:runtime-manager::cloudhub/deploy-mule-application-task.adoc[Deploying Apps to CloudHub]
  * xref:hosting::/ch2-deploy.adoc[Deploying Apps to CloudHub 2.0]

[[custom-connectors]]
== Custom Connectors

Custom connectors are any connectors that are not developed and maintained by MuleSoft, including connectors that are built by MuleSoft partners or customers. If you are using a custom connector in your app, you must update your connector to run on Java 17 and Mule runtime 4.6 and later. 

If you are a MuleSoft partner:

> [calloutlist]

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

. Update your connector that is generated from:
  * xref:partner-connector-upgrade.adoc#upgrade-your-mule-sdk-connectors[Mule SDK]
  * xref:partner-connector-upgrade.adoc#upgrade-your-rest-sdk-connectors[REST SDK]
  * xref:partner-connector-upgrade.adoc#upgrade-your-rest-connect-connectors[REST Connect]
. Test your connector using xref:partner-connector-upgrade.adoc#test-your-custom-connector-with-mtf[MTF].
. Deploy your Mule application:
  * xref:runtime-fabric::/deploy-to-runtime-fabric.adoc[Deploying Apps to Runtime Fabric]
  * xref:runtime-manager::cloudhub/deploy-mule-application-task.adoc[Deploying Apps to CloudHub]
  * xref:hosting::/ch2-deploy.adoc[Deploying Apps to CloudHub 2.0]

If you are a MuleSoft customer:

> [calloutlist]

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

= Java Support

MuleSoft is adopting Java's long-term-support (LTS) release cadence, beginning with Mule runtime 4.6, which adds support for Java 17 LTS. 

Many third-party vendors are discontinuing support for Java 8, which impacts the MuleSoft product stack. Adopting this new release cadence provides greater security, compliance, and performance.

> This change has no immediate impact to Mule applications that are running on currently supported Mule versions, or on applications that are upgraded to Mule runtime 4.6, as existing Java 8 apps will continue to run on Java 8 until February 2026, giving you time to plan for your upgrade to Java 17.

Reviewer: Feb 2026 or 2025?

  * xref:partner-connector-upgrade.adoc#upgrade-your-rest-connect-connectors[REST Connect]
. Test your connector using xref:partner-connector-upgrade.adoc#test-your-custom-connector-with-mtf[MTF].
. Deploy your Mule application:
  * xref:runtime-fabric::/deploy-to-runtime-fabric.adoc[Deploying Apps to Runtime Fabric]
  * xref:runtime-manager::cloudhub/deploy-mule-application-task.adoc[Deploying Apps to CloudHub]
  * xref:hosting::/ch2-deploy.adoc[Deploying Apps to CloudHub 2.0]

If you are a MuleSoft customer:

[calloutlist]
. Update your connector that is generated from:
  * xref:customer-connector-upgrade.adoc#upgrade-your-mule-sdk-connectors[Mule SDK]
  * xref:customer-connector-upgrade.adoc#upgrade-your-rest-connect-connectors[REST Connect]
. Test your connector using xref:customer-connector-upgrade.adoc#test-your-custom-connector-with-munit[MUnit].
. Deploy your Mule application:
  * xref:runtime-fabric::/deploy-to-runtime-fabric.adoc[Deploying Apps to Runtime Fabric]
  * xref:runtime-manager::cloudhub/deploy-mule-application-task.adoc[Deploying Apps to CloudHub]
  * xref:hosting::/ch2-deploy.adoc[Deploying Apps to CloudHub 2.0]

[[policies]]
== Policies

> The MuleSoft-included Mule Gateway policies are compatible with Java 17 beginning with the Mule runtime 4.6 release. These policies continue to be compatible with Java 8 until February 2025, so it's best to start updating your policies as soon as possible. 

Reviewer: is this February 2025 or February 2026? I'm not sure

[IMPORTANT]
To ensure your API proxies or Mule apps are protected when upgrading, upgrade your policies *before* upgrading your API proxies or Mule apps.

For details about how to upgrade your policies, see xref:upgrade-policies-proxies.adoc#upgrading-automated-policies[] and xref:upgrade-policies-proxies.adoc#upgrading-api-level-policies[].

[[api-proxies]]
== API Proxies

> The MuleSoft-included API proxies are compatible with Java 17 beginning with the Mule runtime 4.6 release. These API proxies continue to be compatible with Java 8 until February 2025, so it’s best to start updating your API proxies as soon as possible. 

Reviewer: same here

= Java Support

> MuleSoft is adopting Java’s long-term-support (LTS) release cadence, beginning with Mule Runtime 4.6, which adds support for Java 17 LTS. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
MuleSoft is adopting Java’s long-term-support (LTS) release cadence, beginning with Mule runtime 4.6, which adds support for Java 17 LTS. 
```
Modifying the prod name.

Many third-party vendors are discontinuing support for Java 8, which impacts the MuleSoft product stack. Adopting this new release cadence provides greater security, compliance, and performance.

> This change has no immediate impact to Mule applications and Mule Gateway policies and proxies that are running on currently supported Mule versions, or on applications that are upgraded to Mule Runtime 4.6, as existing Java 8 apps will continue to run on Java 8 until February 2026, giving you time to plan for your upgrade to Java 17.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This change has no immediate impact to Mule applications and Mule Gateway policies and proxies that are running on currently supported Mule versions, or on applications that are upgraded to Mule runtime 4.6, as existing Java 8 apps will continue to run on Java 8 until February 2026, giving you time to plan for your upgrade to Java 17.
```

Java 17 upgrade planning includes evaluating connectors, integration apps, Mule Gateway policies, and proxies, as all of these components rely on Java. 

[mule-runtime-java-support]
== Mule Runtime Java Support

The following table shows the timeline for Java 8 and Java 17 support:

[%header%autowidth.spread]
|===
|Mule Version| Release Date |Java Version | End of Standard Support | End of Extended Support
|4.5 Edge | October 2023 |8 | February 2024 | June 2024
|4.6 LTS | February 2024 | 8 and 17 | February 2025 | February 2026
|4.6 Edge | February 2024 |8 and 17| June 2024 | October 2024

> |4.7 Edge | June 2024 | 8 and 17 | October 2024 | February 2026 ?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|4.7 Edge | June 2024 | 8 and 17 | October 2024 | February 2025
```

As per the table in this doc: [Internal FAQ: MuleSoft Java 17](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1SNc93jv3WPiwUQRvw7KhRLDUKsfv3sGwXx9rBT096HI/edit)

| 4.8 Edge | October 2024 | 8 and 17 | February 2025 | June 2025
| 4.9 LTS | February 2025 | 17 | February 2026 | February 2027
| 4.9 Edge | February 2025 | 17 | June 2025 | October 2025
|===

[NOTE]

> Along with the end of support for Java 8 with the Mule Runtime 4.9 release in February 2025, Java 11 will also no longer be available. Plan your upgrade path for apps that are running on both Java 8 and Java 11.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Along with the end of support for Java 8 with the Mule runtime 4.9 release in February 2025, Java 11 will also no longer be available. Plan your upgrade path for apps that are running on both Java 8 and Java 11.
```

[IMPORTANT]
To ensure your API proxies or Mule apps are protected when upgrading, upgrade your API policies *before* upgrading your API proxies or Mule apps.

[anypoint-connectors-and-modules]
== Anypoint Connectors and Modules

Anypoint Connectors and modules are certified by MuleSoft to run on Java 17. For information about Java 17 support for each connector and module, see the xref:release-notes::connector/anypoint-connector-release-notes.adoc[Release Notes] for that connector or module. Java compatibility information is also provided on the Exchange tiles for connectors and modules. 

The most commonly used Anypoint Connectors and modules are Java 17-compatible now, and others are being released regularly. See https://help.salesforce.com/s/articleView?id=000782248&type=1[Java 17 Compatible Anypoint Connectors^] for a list of Java 17-compatible connectors.

To upgrade Anypoint Connectors:

> . Update your Mule app to run on Mule Runtime 4.6 or later. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Update your Mule app to run on Mule runtime 4.6 or later. 
```

  * xref:hosting::/ch2-deploy.adoc[Deploying Apps to CloudHub 2.0]

[custom-connectors]
=== Custom Connectors

Custom connectors are any connectors that are not developed and maintained by MuleSoft, including connectors that are built by MuleSoft partners using Mule SDK, or XML SDK.

If you are using a custom connector in your app, you must update your connector to run on Java 17 and MuleSoft Runtime 4.6 and later. After you update your connector using Mule Java SDK or XML SDK, you must test your app and deploy it. 

image:java-upgrade-connectors.png[Java upgrade steps for connectors]

[calloutlist]
. Update your connector using:
  * xref:mule-sdk/getting-started.adoc[Mule Java SDK]
  * xref:mule-sdk/xml-sdk.adoc[Mule XML SDK]
. Test your connector using xref:munit/index.adoc[MUnit].
. Deploy your Mule application:
  * xref:runtime-fabric::/deploy-to-runtime-fabric.adoc[Deploying Apps to Runtime Fabric]
  * xref:runtime-manager::cloudhub/deploy-mule-application-task.adoc[Deploying Apps to CloudHub]
  * xref:hosting::/ch2-deploy.adoc[Deploying Apps to CloudHub 2.0]

[rest-connect-generated-connectors]
=== REST Connect Generated Connectors

> For connectors that are generated from an API specification using the REST Connect connector generator tool, all you have to do to make the connector Java 17-compatible is republish the API specification to Exchange. 

Reviewer: Daniel Vlad was saying we should mention how users can save time by activating TLS when rebuilding for J17 (similar to what is mentioned in the external J17 communication doc). Might need to add callout here for TLS

See xref:exhange/to-deploy-using-rest-connect.adoc[REST Connect Connector Generator].

[api-policies]
== API Policies

> The MuleSoft-provided out-of-the-box (OOTB) Mule Gateway and Flex Gateway policies and proxies are compatible with Java 17 beginning with the Mule Runtime 4.6 release. These policies and proxies continue to be compatible with Java 8 until February 2025, so it's best to start updating your policies and proxies as soon as possible. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The MuleSoft-provided out-of-the-box (OOTB) Mule Gateway and Flex Gateway policies and proxies are compatible with Java 17 beginning with the Mule runtime 4.6 release. These policies and proxies continue to be compatible with Java 8 until February 2025, so it's best to start updating your policies and proxies as soon as possible. 
```

When deploying to CloudHub, MMP deploys the latest build version of a release train when it's given a major and minor version. MMP has a new Java version property to explicitly deploy to a specified Java version.

When deploying to Runtime Fabric (RTF) and CloudHub 2.0, MMP accepts the entire tag of the build so you can use the correct semantic version (SemVer) in your deployment. 

See the following documentation for more information:

* xref:cloudhub-2/ch2-deploy-maven.adoc[Deploying apps to CloudHub 2.0 using the Maven Plugin]
* xref:runtime-fabric/latest/deploy-maven-4.x.adoc[Deploying Applications to Runtime Fabric Using Maven]

[[dataweave]]
== DataWeave

DataWeave uses Java’s reflection API to read and write Java objects and Java 17 adds some restrictions in encapsulation and reflective access that affect the Java Data Format.

To ensure that your applications continue to work as expected, follow these guidelines:

* Verify that the objects used by your application are Plain Old Java Objects (POJOs). 
+
POJOs are required from now on and you must also ensure that POJOs have:

* Default constructor
* Getters for all properties
* Setters for all properties

> See the DataWeave documentation for more information. [LINK TO DATAWEAVE DOCS]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See xref:dataweave::dataweave-formats-java.adoc#java-support[Java Support] for more information.
```

= Java Support

MuleSoft is adopting Java’s long-term-support (LTS) release cadence, beginning with Mule Runtime 4.6, which adds support for Java 17 LTS. 

Many third-party vendors are discontinuing support for Java 8, which impacts the MuleSoft product stack. Adopting this new release cadence provides greater security, compliance, and performance.

This change has no immediate impact to Mule applications and Mule Gateway policies and proxies that are running on currently supported Mule versions, or on applications that are upgraded to Mule Runtime 4.6, as existing Java 8 apps will continue to run on Java 8 until February 2026, giving you time to plan for your upgrade to Java 17.

Java 17 upgrade planning includes evaluating connectors, integration apps, Mule Gateway policies, and proxies, as all of these components rely on Java. 

> 

Reviewer: Can we add anchors to each section so we can link from other sections/RNs?
